Hello everyone in this lesson we will answer the question what exactly is Wordpress the boring soulless
answer is that WordPress is a free tool that helps us create Web sites and blogs.
OK.
But humans don't learn from boring soulless answers right.
We learn from real world examples.
So in this lesson I'm going to share my screen and visually show you what Wordpress is.
It's important to point out that in this lesson I do not want you to worry about following along step
by step on your computer.
In our next lesson you'll get your hands dirty and learn how to set up your own WordPress website that
you are the owner of.
OK but in this current lesson I want you to take your hands off the keyboard.
Sit back relax and just watch.
So right now we're looking at a completed example of a WordPress Web site.
I think that oftentimes the best way to understand something is to begin by looking at a finished product
and dissect it and then once you have a general understanding of what your goal is and the basic moving
pieces involved at that point then it's easy to create your own brand new project from scratch.
So here we see the home page of this example web site and up in the header we see links to different
pages.
So if I click on About Us Here is the About Us page it's got a bit of text an intro video a photo a
bit of text.
If I scroll back up to the navigation we see there's a link named photo gallery.
So if I click that takes me to another page.
This page dedicated to all of these different photographs.
And if we click on one of these thumbnail versions a larger full screen version appears and then we
can click these arrows down at the bottom to cycle through the photos or we can click this X in the
top right to close out of the full screen preview.
OK.
So that's the photo gallery page in the header navigation.
We also see another link named travel.
So if I click that this travel page is a collection of different stories or posts related to travel.
So first we see a trip to the Midwest.
I scroll down further resee trip to the west coast and finally trip to the east coast.
And let's say a visitor of this website was interested in the trip to the west coast story after they
read this initial paragraph.
They could click on this continue reading button and that would take them to this new page with the
full story
backup in the header navigation.
We also see we have a page named recipes.
So if I click on that it's similar to the travel page.
So now we have a collection of stories that are about recipes.
So the first one is Greek salad and we see another one.
Homemade french bread and finally easy spaghetti.
And again if we are interested in any of those we can click on the continue reading button or the title
itself back up in the header navigation.
Finally we have a page named contact us.
So let me click on that on this page we see the company's telephone number and their address.
If I scroll down a bit we see an interactive Google Maps widget.
This allows you to show your visitors where your corporate offices or something along those lines.
If I scroll down further we see a contact form that visitors can fill out.
So they enter their name their email subject line they can choose the service they are interested in.
So the reason they're contacting you.
And then obviously they can type out a message to you and click send.
So that's the Contact Us page if I scroll back up to the top and click on the logo here.
That takes me back to the home page and that's the Web site.
In a nutshell.
Now so far we haven't seen anything specifically related to WordPress.
All we've seen so far is a typical Web site just like any other.
So the question becomes where and how does WordPress fit into the equation.
Well let's imagine we are the owners of this Web site and we want to make a few changes to it.
So for example if I click back to the About Us page let's imagine we are not happy with this opening
paragraph of text.
We want to change.
We want to make a few edits to it.
Now the first thing we need to do is prove to WordPress that we are the owners of the Web site.
Right.
Because this isn't Wikipedia.
We don't want just anyone from the general public who visits our Web site to be able to edit our Web
site.
So to prove to WordPress that we are indeed the owners of this Web site we need to visit the log in
page.
So let me switch over to a new tab in my web browser.
This is the log in page for my wordpress.
For now don't worry about how to navigate to this screen.
We will cover that in detail in our next lesson.
For now just know that I'm going to log in with my username and password to prove to WordPress that
this is my web site.
Once I sign in wordpress will take me over to this administrator dashboard screen.
Now the general public will never ever ever see this screen.
This section is only for the eyes of the owner of the Web site.
OK so this is where we edit and manage and build the Web site.
Now let's get back to the task at hand.
So remember back on our Web site we want to edit this text that lives on the About Us page.
Now the keyword there is.
Page We are interested in the About Us page.
So over in the administrator dashboard along the left hand side of the screen there is an item in this
menu named pages so I'm going to click that and then word press will show me a list of all of the pages
on my web site.
There's no limit to how many pages you can have on a WordPress site.
If we did want to create a new one we could just click this button that says add new but in our case
right now we don't want to create a new page.
We want to edit the existing About Us page so here it is.
It's the first page in the list so I'll click that and now from this screen I can edit the page if I
wanted to change the title of the page I could use this field so I can type here but we want to leave
the title about us.
Remember our goal was to edit this intro paragraph so maybe after this first sentence I want to add
a new sentence that reads.
Our company has been around for over a decade.
Maybe I even want this new sentence to be bold so I can just use my cursor to highlight the text and
then within this menu we see the traditional icon for bold.
Perfect.
OK so at this point I'm happy with my change I want to save my change.
So over on the right hand corner of the screen I want to click this blue update button all right my
changes were successfully saved and now if we jump back to the public facing Web site that anyone in
the world can see if I refreshed this about us page there we see a new sentence.
All right let's give ourselves another example task.
So for example over on the Travel page of my web site let's imagine that we are not happy with the intro
paragraph for the trip to the west coast story so maybe we want to make it edit to this text.
Now you might think that our first step is to head back over to the administrator dashboard of Wordpress
and click on pages in the sidebar but you'll notice that trip to the west coast is nowhere to be seen
in this list of pages.
And that's because the trip to the west coast story is not a page it is a post.
So what's the difference between a page and a post.
Well I will explain the difference in about 10 seconds from now.
But first I just want to say that you don't need to worry about memorizing the difference right now
in this lesson because this is a topic that we will revisit again and again throughout the course.
But for now I will say that a page is an independent entity.
It's something that can stand on its own right so we saw an example of that in the About Us page whereas
a post is part of a collection of multiple posts.
So in this instance the West Coast trip story is a part of a collection of travel related posts.
And if we want to make changes to it we can just look in the left hand sidebar menu of the Wordpress
administrator dashboard and click on this menu item named posts.
All right here we see a list of all of the posts on the website.
Greek salad homemade french bread easy spaghetti trip to the Midwest a trip to the west coast.
This is the one I want to edit so I click it.
Lets imagine I want to add a new sentence after this first sentence so I just place my cursor here.
The trip lasted three days and was wonderful.
I'm happy with that change.
So then I would click this blue update button on the right hand side of the screen but before I do that
I want to point out a little something about this category's menu.
This trip to the west coast story shows up under travel on my website because that's the category that
we've assigned it.
If instead we wanted the story to live under recipe's we could just check that box.
OK but obviously I want to leave it categorized under travel.
So let's change that scroll back up click update.
All right my changes were saved.
Now if I switch back to the public facing view of my web site and refresh remember I'm currently on
the Travel page of my site.
If we scroll back down to the west coast story here is the new sentence.
Perfect.
Now believe it or not over the last ten minutes you've just learned about 90 percent of Wordpress pages
and posts are the heart and soul of Wordpress websites.
It's really that simple.
Now before we bring this lesson to a close here's a review of the key points that I want you to walk
away with from this video.
I have four main points.
Number one we have the public facing portion of the Web site that the entire world can see.
Number two we have the administrator dashboard screens that only the owner of the website has access
to.
And that's where they manage the web.
From number three we have pages and we have posts and our fourth and final point is one that I didn't
verbalize until right now.
But you may have picked up on it subconsciously and that is that in wordpress there's a separation between
content and presentation.
So what does that phrase mean.
Separating our content from our presentation.
Well let's define our terms.
So content in this context refers to the titles of our pages and posts and to the actual paragraphs
of text.
Right.
So content refers to our raw data presentation refers to the design of our Web site.
So the colors the spacing the layout the fonts typography the header the footer you get the point.
Presentation refers to design or stylistic choices.
Now in this lesson we only saw examples of how to edit content.
We did not learn how to edit presentation.
Don't worry you can definitely edit the presentation of Wordpress websites.
You are not locked into this design or theme.
We all learn how to change our presentation later on in the course but I did want to mention that concept
of separating content from presentation as early in the Course as possible because it's a big part of
what makes WordPress so powerful and flexible and it's an idea that we'll circle back to many times
in the course.
All right that's going to do it for this lesson in our next lesson.
You'll learn how to create your very own new WordPress Web site.
It will start out as a completely empty blank canvas but you'll be the administrator of it.
It'll be your blank canvas to work with.
Also I will be hitting the metaphorical reset button and I'll start with a brand new MT WordPress website
as well so that way you and I can move forward together step by step.
I'm excited to start rolling along and seeing what you'll create with wordpress.
Let's keep things moving and I'll see you in the next lesson.